[Music]
well hello everyone and welcome to
another episode here on the mi girder
channel in this episode we're going to
talk about how to keep your tomato
plants blight free all season long now
this is something that a lot of
gardeners aim for very few gardeners can
get it because there's it's an
aggressive an aggressive care regiment
on your tomatoes to keep them blight
free but I can tell you that if you are
up for it the rewards are so huge that I
mean the the amount of tomatoes that
you're going to get throughout a full
growing season versus just like half a
growing season when most tomatoes start
getting Blyton and stressed and dying is
just incredible I mean you can look
double or triple your yields and and
just by just by taking these care tips
so I do hope you'll enjoy this episode
and we're going to jump right on into it
so it's not gonna hopefully be a long
one but the first part that you want to
do is you want a single stem tomatoes
are very prone to blight they just they
naturally just get it I I don't know a
single person regardless of their skill
level that has not gotten blight but
it's it's the the time in the season
that you get the blight I know for me
before I II was using all these tips and
I was just growing them just to grow
them and I didn't really care about any
care tips at all I just was growing the
tomatoes I would get blight right around
maybe now early August so this is like
late July early August I'd start to get
blight and that is I mean that's a shame
because our plants if taking care if you
take care of them well here in Michigan
they can go up until mid-october so
early August versus mid October they're
just so prone to blight and one of the
things you can do is that you can you
can defoliate and defoliation seems like
a bad thing but we talk about all the
time how defoliation is a good thing we
talked about with our with our zucchini
as well defoliation is a good thing a
lot of gardeners freaked out about it
but it is something that is very
important if you're going to have light
free tomatoes because foliage really
kind of clutters things up and if you
have a lot of foliage and you're not
single stemming your tomatoes single
stemming is even a way to cut out even
more foliage because you're not having a
stress side growth extra you know new
plants the suckers growing you're going
to take off all that extra foliage
leaving only what the plant needs and
it's going to allow for very good
airflow airflow is super important
because when water from Dew or rain gets
on the leaves that Dew or rain needs to
dry out because there's fungus in the
air and that'll lead to our next part
about fungus which is the blight is a
fungus and it's also found in the soil
so there's soil borne fungus there's air
borne fungus and and those mold spores
are what causes the blight and if you
can't dry your leaves out that's gonna
be the first reason why you get the
blight is because those those blight
spores need moisture in order to
cultivate and so you can greatly cut
down on the amount of light you have by
having drier conditions on the leaves
and that's the first step so single
stemming and d foliated on that on the d
foliated method or on the foliated i
want to bring you in close to kind of
perk or tip 1.2 or 1.5 it's a it's not
necessarily part two but it's going to
be the the next part the next part into
foliated so coming in close I'll show
you what I'm talking about so you can
see you here with our Tomatoes all the
soil has air flow around it and the
leaves are taken way way up you'll see
some curling here and stuff that's not
actually an issue that's just caused
from heat stress when our when our
temperatures were in the hundreds for a
straight week and they had very little
water so that's that's fine that's not a
problem but you can see here if you look
there are is a good eight to ten inches
from soil level to the lowest leaf
branch and that's what we that's what we
like to see we will take our branches
and we will prune them up you can see
all these little all these little scabs
here there's scab they're scab there's
get there skip there ski up there we
take all those leaves off because what
we want to do you want to keep the leads
way off soil level and the industry
standard is typically the you want to go
to two leaf nodes up
of the fruit so you get the first fruit
set and you go one leaf node two leaf
nodes and you prune that and that or and
you you leave this one and this is about
as as low as you want to go with your
fruit or your your leaf so that will
keep the leaves well off of the soil so
that any splashing that occurs won't get
any any fungus spores from the soil on
the leaves and also will allow good
airflow underneath which is super
important as well
so as you can see absolutely no blight
even though they're curled no blight the
leaves are green they are rigid they're
very healthy and that is what we like to
see so the next step in keeping your
tomato plants blight free all season
long is to spray regularly with a baking
soda spray baking soda is going to
change the pH of your leaf and the leaf
surface needs to be a certain pH in
order for the the blight spores to be
able to colonize so if you change the
the pH the blight force can't colonize
so what we do is we take two tablespoons
of baking soda into one gallon of water
we'll take one tablespoon of vegetable
oil and then just a few drops of dish
soap just to emulsify that oil in the
water we'll shake it up really well and
then we'll spray down our plants once
every two weeks now once every two weeks
the reason why is because any more than
that you can stretch your plant out even
if it's an organic chemical it still can
stretch your plants out and your plants
don't like being sprayed with chemicals
regardless they're inorganic or not so
what you want to do is you want to just
spray them down just as a preventative
to keep that pH of your leaf
inhospitable but not too much that it
stresses the plant out and if you have
blight if you actually do have blight
already
you can still spray it down but use it
once a week and we have videos on that
you can check it out now the third and
final step to keeping your tomato plants
blight free is actually by keeping them
in the Sun so tomato plants they will
get blight if they do not get Sun week
leaves and stress leaves are generally
leaves that don't have access to enough
sunlight and so the Sun are actually
much like if you have acne and you go
in the sun the sun exposure will help to
clear up that acne but not saying that
acne and and blight are you know the
same what I'm saying is the solar
radiation from the Sun will help to
radiate the leaves just enough to take
care of the blight spores and often
times where you see blight is on leaves
that are tucked in in shades so what we
will do is we will go around and how we
space out our plants and how we how we
prune our plants also will dictate you
know kind of the the the health of the
plant because what we don't want to do
is we don't want to have any leaves that
are in deep dark shade so I'll show you
what I'm talking about now
so going all up along the stake here
you'll notice that the leaves go out in
one direction and out in the other and
what we'll do is we will actively prune
the plant if there are any leaves going
into the center because you'll see here
in the center of the bed there are not
any or very few leaves that are going
into the center and i see a few that
that could be pruned here you'll see
down here down here there's there's this
branch here and so we'll take that and
we'll you know we'll prune that one off
when I get a chance because I don't have
snippers on me right now but this leaf
here is growing into the center and
you'll have an issue because this row of
tomatoes here will shade this row of
tomatoes and the center here does not
get a whole lot of Sun and that Sun is
what's really important to keeping
keeping your leaves blight free so as
you can see over here we have the same
thing most of our foliage most of our
foliage goes parallel to the bed or what
comes out either out or parallel and
that way it has access to the Sun over
here just like this side of the bed has
foliage coming this way or parallel to
have access to this part of the Sun and
anything in here is a no-go because we
want that very very good sun exposure
which will help to keep the plants
blight free so there are three simple
steps you can follow to keeping your
tomato plants blight free
now I know that obviously the season is
already underway there are things you
can do to mitigate the problems like you
can still go back and prune even if your
plants are fully mature you can still
prune up your tomato plants you can get
that foliage off the soil there are
still things you can do it's not too
late but it is still information that
you can take into next year as well even
if it is too late and so I just I also
want to close and stress that even
though tomato plants are very prone to
blight it is very easy to control I
think oftentimes people find it daunting
I think people find it really
overwhelming to to prune their plants I
don't know what to prune I don't know
what not to prune what I can tell you is
that we have videos on that and I think
one of the biggest things is just doing
it if you don't do it not doing it is
going to have guaranteed chance of
failure because the fact of the matter
is is that not taking you're not taking
care of your tomato plants is just like
rolling the dice as to when your tomato
plants are going to get blight you might
have a really good season and it might
be very dry and it might be you know
very sunny it might be very warm and
your tomato plants don't get blight
until you know later in the season or it
could be like how it is here and our
neighbors day treatment plants are
already plagued with blight whereas ours
are beautiful they're strong they're
growing because we've taken those steps
and so it's not to say that your growing
conditions can't help you out a little
bit but simply by doing nothing at all
is you're just gambling and I would
never want to gamble with my tomato
plants so take those steps and it's
really really easy
it looks daunting to someone that's
never prune a tomato plant but I can
tell you we do have videos on it I will
post links to how we prune our tomato
plants in the description box below and
even if you're not using our staking
methods you can still prune them up like
I showed you by taking the the leaves
from the bottom up to the first fruit
set you can still help your plants out
by taking off unneeded suckers and
things like that that is still something
that any of anybody using using any
method can do so as always I hope you
all enjoyed hopefully you learn
something new and this is Luke from neon
my gardener channel reminding you to
grow big or go home
I'll catch y'all later see ya bye
[Music]
you